docs/backends/pixi-build-cmake.md, before:

# pixi-build-cmake

The `pixi-build-cmake` backend is designed for building C and C++ projects using the [CMake](https://cmake.org/) build system. It provides seamless integration with Pixi's package management workflow while maintaining cross-platform compatibility.

!!! warning
    `pixi-build` is a preview feature, and will change until it is stabilized.
    This is why we require users to opt in to that feature by adding "pixi-build" to `workspace.preview`.

    ```toml
    [workspace]
    preview = ["pixi-build"]
    ```


## Overview

This backend automatically generates conda packages from CMake-based projects by:

- **Detecting and configuring compilers**: Automatically includes the appropriate C/C++ compilers for your target platform
- **Building with Ninja**: Uses the fast Ninja build system for optimal build performance
- **Cross-platform support**: Works consistently across Linux, macOS, and Windows
- **Standard CMake workflow**: Follows CMake best practices with sensible defaults

## Basic Usage

To use the CMake backend in your `pixi.toml`, add it to your package's build configuration:

```toml
[package]
name = "cmake_package"
version = "0.1.0"

[package.build]
backend = { name = "pixi-build-cmake", version = "*" }
channels = [
  "https://prefix.dev/conda-forge",
]
```

### Required Dependencies

The backend automatically includes the following build tools:

- `cmake` - The CMake build system
- `ninja` - Fast build system used by CMake
- Platform-specific C++ compilers (e.g., `gcc_linux-64`, `clang_osx-64`)

You can add these to your [`build-dependencies`](https://pixi.sh/latest/build/dependency_types/) if you need specific versions:

```toml
[package.build-dependencies]
ninja = "1.13"
```

## Configuration Options

You can customize the CMake backend behavior using the `[package.build.config]` section in your `pixi.toml`. The backend supports the following configuration options:

### `extra-args`

- **Type**: `Array<String>`
- **Default**: `[]`
- **Target Merge Behavior**: `Overwrite` - Platform-specific arguments completely replace base arguments

Additional command-line arguments to pass to the CMake configuration step. These arguments are inserted into the `cmake` command that configures your project.

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-args = [
    "-DENABLE_TESTING=ON",
    "-DCMAKE_CXX_STANDARD=17"
]
```

For target-specific configuration, platform arguments completely replace the base configuration:

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-args = ["-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release"]

[package.build.config.targets.linux-64]
extra-args = ["-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug", "-DLINUX_FLAG=ON"]
# Result for linux-64: ["-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug", "-DLINUX_FLAG=ON"]
```

### `env`

- **Type**: `Map<String, String>`
- **Default**: `{}`
- **Target Merge Behavior**: `Merge` - Platform environment variables override base variables with same name, others are merged

Environment variables to set during the build process. These variables are available to both the CMake configuration and build steps.

```toml
[package.build.config]
env = { CMAKE_VERBOSE_MAKEFILE = "ON", CXXFLAGS = "-O3 -march=native" }
```

For target-specific configuration, platform environment variables are merged with base variables:

```toml
[package.build.config]
env = { CMAKE_VERBOSE_MAKEFILE = "OFF", COMMON_VAR = "base" }

[package.build.config.targets.linux-64]
env = { COMMON_VAR = "linux", LINUX_VAR = "value" }
# Result for linux-64: { CMAKE_VERBOSE_MAKEFILE = "OFF", COMMON_VAR = "linux", LINUX_VAR = "value" }
```

### `debug-dir`

- **Type**: `String` (path)
- **Default**: Not set
- **Target Merge Behavior**: Not allowed - Cannot have target specific value

If specified, internal build state and debug information will be written to this directory. Useful for troubleshooting build issues.

```toml
[package.build.config]
debug-dir = ".build-debug"
```


### `extra-input-globs`

- **Type**: `Array<String>`
- **Default**: `[]`
- **Target Merge Behavior**: `Overwrite` - Platform-specific globs completely replace base globs

Additional glob patterns to include as input files for the build process. These patterns are added to the default input globs that include source files (`**/*.{c,cc,cxx,cpp,h,hpp,hxx}`), CMake files (`**/*.{cmake,cmake.in}`, `**/CMakeFiles.txt`), and other build-related files.

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-input-globs = [
    "assets/**/*",
    "config/*.ini",
    "*.md"
]
```

For target-specific configuration, platform-specific globs completely replace the base:

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-input-globs = ["*.txt"]

[package.build.config.targets.linux-64]
extra-input-globs = ["*.txt", "*.linux", "linux-configs/**/*"]
# Result for linux-64: ["*.txt", "*.linux", "linux-configs/**/*"]
```

### `compilers`

- **Type**: `Array<String>`
- **Default**: `["cxx"]`
- **Target Merge Behavior**: `Overwrite` - Platform-specific compilers completely replace base compilers

List of compilers to use for the build. The backend automatically generates appropriate compiler dependencies using conda-forge's compiler infrastructure.

```toml
[package.build.config]
compilers = ["c", "cxx", "fortran"]
```

For target-specific configuration, platform compilers completely replace the base configuration:

```toml
[package.build.config]
compilers = ["cxx"]

[package.build.config.targets.linux-64]
compilers = ["c", "cxx", "cuda"]
# Result for linux-64: ["c", "cxx", "cuda"]
```

!!! info "Comprehensive Compiler Documentation"
    For detailed information about available compilers, platform-specific behavior, and how conda-forge compilers work, see the [Compilers Documentation](../key_concepts/compilers.md).


## Build Process

The CMake backend follows this build process:

1. **Version Detection**: Displays CMake and Ninja versions for diagnostics
2. **Configuration**: Runs `cmake` with the following default options:
   - `-GNinja`: Use Ninja generator
   - `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release`: Release build by default
   - `-DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$PREFIX`: Install to conda prefix
   - `-DCMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS=ON`: Export compile commands for tooling
   - `-DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON`: Build shared libraries by default
   - `-DPython_EXECUTABLE=$PYTHON`: Use the conda Python executable if it's part of the host dependencies.
3. **Build**: Executes `cmake --build` to compile the project
4. **Install**: Installs the built artifacts to the conda package

## CMake Flag Precedence

With CMake, when duplicate flags are provided, the last flag takes precedence.
The `pixi-build-cmake` backend places `extra-args` after the default CMake flags, allowing you to override default settings.

For example, to switch from the default Release build to Debug mode:

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-args = ["-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug"]
```


## Limitations

- Currently, assumes C++ projects (hardcoded to `cxx` language)
- Language detection from CMakeLists.txt is not yet implemented

## See Also

- [Building C++ Packages](https://pixi.sh/latest/build/cpp/) - Tutorial for building C++ packages with Pixi
- [CMake Documentation](https://cmake.org/documentation/) - Official CMake documentation

Commit message:

feat: always log json parameters to debug folder (#433)
* chore: always log json parameters to debug folder

* Update backends/pixi-build-ros/src/pixi_build_ros/config.py

Co-authored-by: nichmor <nmorkotilo@gmail.com>

* Fix some comments

* Save to the correct work directory

* Change directory back

* Fix test

---------

Co-authored-by: nichmor <nmorkotilo@gmail.com>

docs/backends/pixi-build-cmake.md, after:

# pixi-build-cmake

The `pixi-build-cmake` backend is designed for building C and C++ projects using the [CMake](https://cmake.org/) build system. It provides seamless integration with Pixi's package management workflow while maintaining cross-platform compatibility.

!!! warning
    `pixi-build` is a preview feature, and will change until it is stabilized.
    This is why we require users to opt in to that feature by adding "pixi-build" to `workspace.preview`.

    ```toml
    [workspace]
    preview = ["pixi-build"]
    ```


## Overview

This backend automatically generates conda packages from CMake-based projects by:

- **Detecting and configuring compilers**: Automatically includes the appropriate C/C++ compilers for your target platform
- **Building with Ninja**: Uses the fast Ninja build system for optimal build performance
- **Cross-platform support**: Works consistently across Linux, macOS, and Windows
- **Standard CMake workflow**: Follows CMake best practices with sensible defaults

## Basic Usage

To use the CMake backend in your `pixi.toml`, add it to your package's build configuration:

```toml
[package]
name = "cmake_package"
version = "0.1.0"

[package.build]
backend = { name = "pixi-build-cmake", version = "*" }
channels = [
  "https://prefix.dev/conda-forge",
]
```

### Required Dependencies

The backend automatically includes the following build tools:

- `cmake` - The CMake build system
- `ninja` - Fast build system used by CMake
- Platform-specific C++ compilers (e.g., `gcc_linux-64`, `clang_osx-64`)

You can add these to your [`build-dependencies`](https://pixi.sh/latest/build/dependency_types/) if you need specific versions:

```toml
[package.build-dependencies]
ninja = "1.13"
```

## Configuration Options

You can customize the CMake backend behavior using the `[package.build.config]` section in your `pixi.toml`. The backend supports the following configuration options:

### `extra-args`

- **Type**: `Array<String>`
- **Default**: `[]`
- **Target Merge Behavior**: `Overwrite` - Platform-specific arguments completely replace base arguments

Additional command-line arguments to pass to the CMake configuration step. These arguments are inserted into the `cmake` command that configures your project.

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-args = [
    "-DENABLE_TESTING=ON",
    "-DCMAKE_CXX_STANDARD=17"
]
```

For target-specific configuration, platform arguments completely replace the base configuration:

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-args = ["-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release"]

[package.build.config.targets.linux-64]
extra-args = ["-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug", "-DLINUX_FLAG=ON"]
# Result for linux-64: ["-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug", "-DLINUX_FLAG=ON"]
```

### `env`

- **Type**: `Map<String, String>`
- **Default**: `{}`
- **Target Merge Behavior**: `Merge` - Platform environment variables override base variables with same name, others are merged

Environment variables to set during the build process. These variables are available to both the CMake configuration and build steps.

```toml
[package.build.config]
env = { CMAKE_VERBOSE_MAKEFILE = "ON", CXXFLAGS = "-O3 -march=native" }
```

For target-specific configuration, platform environment variables are merged with base variables:

```toml
[package.build.config]
env = { CMAKE_VERBOSE_MAKEFILE = "OFF", COMMON_VAR = "base" }

[package.build.config.targets.linux-64]
env = { COMMON_VAR = "linux", LINUX_VAR = "value" }
# Result for linux-64: { CMAKE_VERBOSE_MAKEFILE = "OFF", COMMON_VAR = "linux", LINUX_VAR = "value" }
```

### `debug-dir`

The backend always writes JSON-RPC request/response logs and the generated intermediate recipe to the `debug` subdirectory inside each work directory (for example `<work_directory>/debug`). The deprecated `debug-dir` configuration option is ignored; if it is present in a manifest a warning is emitted.

### `extra-input-globs`

- **Type**: `Array<String>`
- **Default**: `[]`
- **Target Merge Behavior**: `Overwrite` - Platform-specific globs completely replace base globs

Additional glob patterns to include as input files for the build process. These patterns are added to the default input globs that include source files (`**/*.{c,cc,cxx,cpp,h,hpp,hxx}`), CMake files (`**/*.{cmake,cmake.in}`, `**/CMakeFiles.txt`), and other build-related files.

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-input-globs = [
    "assets/**/*",
    "config/*.ini",
    "*.md"
]
```

For target-specific configuration, platform-specific globs completely replace the base:

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-input-globs = ["*.txt"]

[package.build.config.targets.linux-64]
extra-input-globs = ["*.txt", "*.linux", "linux-configs/**/*"]
# Result for linux-64: ["*.txt", "*.linux", "linux-configs/**/*"]
```

### `compilers`

- **Type**: `Array<String>`
- **Default**: `["cxx"]`
- **Target Merge Behavior**: `Overwrite` - Platform-specific compilers completely replace base compilers

List of compilers to use for the build. The backend automatically generates appropriate compiler dependencies using conda-forge's compiler infrastructure.

```toml
[package.build.config]
compilers = ["c", "cxx", "fortran"]
```

For target-specific configuration, platform compilers completely replace the base configuration:

```toml
[package.build.config]
compilers = ["cxx"]

[package.build.config.targets.linux-64]
compilers = ["c", "cxx", "cuda"]
# Result for linux-64: ["c", "cxx", "cuda"]
```

!!! info "Comprehensive Compiler Documentation"
    For detailed information about available compilers, platform-specific behavior, and how conda-forge compilers work, see the [Compilers Documentation](../key_concepts/compilers.md).


## Build Process

The CMake backend follows this build process:

1. **Version Detection**: Displays CMake and Ninja versions for diagnostics
2. **Configuration**: Runs `cmake` with the following default options:
   - `-GNinja`: Use Ninja generator
   - `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release`: Release build by default
   - `-DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=$PREFIX`: Install to conda prefix
   - `-DCMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS=ON`: Export compile commands for tooling
   - `-DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON`: Build shared libraries by default
   - `-DPython_EXECUTABLE=$PYTHON`: Use the conda Python executable if it's part of the host dependencies.
3. **Build**: Executes `cmake --build` to compile the project
4. **Install**: Installs the built artifacts to the conda package

## CMake Flag Precedence

With CMake, when duplicate flags are provided, the last flag takes precedence.
The `pixi-build-cmake` backend places `extra-args` after the default CMake flags, allowing you to override default settings.

For example, to switch from the default Release build to Debug mode:

```toml
[package.build.config]
extra-args = ["-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug"]
```


## Limitations

- Currently, assumes C++ projects (hardcoded to `cxx` language)
- Language detection from CMakeLists.txt is not yet implemented

## See Also

- [Building C++ Packages](https://pixi.sh/latest/build/cpp/) - Tutorial for building C++ packages with Pixi
- [CMake Documentation](https://cmake.org/documentation/) - Official CMake documentation
